# Project: Pewlett Hackard (PH) Employee Database
## Background:
PH wants to determine how many employees are retiring and which employees, who are retiring, are eligible for a retirement package. The company has been using Excel and VBA to maintain its employee information and would like to move its data over to a database. The development team decided on using PostgreSQL to create the relational database system.

## Data:
The employee data consisted of six CSV files: department.csv, dept_emp.csv, dept_manager.csv, employees.csv, salaries.csv, and titles.csv. The first step was to download and look at it. The data consisted of characters, integers, and dates. The largest dataset was titles.csv, made up of 443,309 rows, and the smallest set was departments.csv, made up of ten rows.

## Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) and Database Structure:
The next step was to create a conceptual ERD and build upon it to create a logical and physical ERD using the application on <https://app.quickdatabasediagrams.com/#/>. Six tables were made using the file's respective file name, making each file's column an attribute of its table. Once the tables were created, the logical ERD was made by identifying the data types for each attribute. The physical ERD was created by identifying the primary and foreign keys for each table. For an overview of primary and foreign keys, see https://www.techopedia.com/definition/5547/primary-key and https://www.techopedia.com/definition/7272/foreign-key. With the physical ERD, the database was made by creating the six tables with the attributes entered in, identified with their respective key type and data type (See Schema.sql file and ERD).

## Queries and Analysis (See Queries file for code):
 The retirement parameters for the project were employees born between 1952 and 1955 and who were hired between 1985 and 1988.  Thus, a retirement_info table was created using a conditional selection on the employee table. The next step was to create a department list of each employee, along with their to_ and from_date. This table was constructed by selecting the information from the departments table and department manager table using an inner join. The list was then filtered for current employees. Then counts of the employees were made for each department. The number of current employees retiring is as follows, Marketing : 2,199, Finance : 1,908, Human Resources : 1,953, Production : 8,174, Development : 9,281, Quality Management : 2,234, Sales : 5,860, Research : 2,413, Customer Service : 2,597. A new employee table was made, including the employees' numbers, last and first name, gender, and salary. A table of managers was generated, including the manager's department, name, employee number, and employment dates. Another table of retiring employees similar to retirement_info, but includes the employee's department. The company requested separate lists for retiring employees in the sales and development departments. 7,301 sales employees are retiring and 11,627 employees are retiring from the development department. A table of retiring employees by title was generated as well as a table of employees were eligible for a mentor program; the mentor program requirement was their birth year fall in the year 1965, and the table had to be deduplicated. The number of eligible employees for the mentorship program is 1,940. Further analysis can be done to determine the following: current department manager gender ratio, salary growth over the years by title. Calculating the department manager gender ratio could help Pewlett Hackard comply with specific governance and social standards. Salary growth over the years could help PH executives determine the salaries of their employees by their title, e.g., what will the salary be for a senior engineer in ten years.
